How much of a reader’s understanding of a text is idiosyncratic and how much is common to that of most other readers of the same text of a similar age and education? What is the degree of individual difference or subjectivity in text understanding? The answers to these questions are likely to vary with text type. In this paper, the focus will be on general-interest articles (from Reader’s Digest), and on readers’ perceptions and interpretations of lexical cohesive relations in the text. Perceptions of these relations contribute to a reader’s perception of the structure of the text.There are two fundamentally different approaches to text structure: Some methods, such as Rhetorical Structure Theory (Mann and Thompson, 1988), aim to identify pre-defined structures in a text. Other methods are associationist; they focus on building up text-specific structures, for example through the creation of ad-hoc categories such as those proposed by Barsalou (1989) or groups of related words within the text such as lexical chains (Halliday and Hasan, 1976; Morris and Hirst, 1991). There is much to be gained by accepting the contributions of each approach, and in discovering how they interact. In a sense, the work of Morris and Hirst attempted this by relating associationist lexical chains to the predefined intentional structure of discourse that was proposed by Grosz and Sidner (1986). However, that particular model of discourse structure was itself rather associationist in that the “intentional structure” of a text is quite ad hoc and textspecific.The present work is an examination of the degree of subjectivity of two aspects of the lexical cohesion (Halliday and Hasan, 1976) perceived by readers of text: the word groups (lexical chains) that are formed and the lexical semantic relations that are perceived between the words. We know of no prior research on readers’ perceptions of lexical cohesion or the associated lexical semantic relations in text. Furthermore, most of the research on lexical semantic relations has not been done in the context of text. Instead, most researchers have just looked at word pairs and the four “classical” lexical relations: synonymy, antonymy, hyponymy, and meronymy (Fellbaum, 1998; Cruse, 1986; Halliday and Hasan, 1989). The classical relations themselves form predetermined structures consisting of hierarchies that have been studied and widely applied since Aristotle. The nonclassical relations (all of the rest) have tended to remain unnamed and unstructured, as in the relations implicit in Roget’s Thesaurus, in the “associative” relations or Related Terms used in Library and Information Science (Neelameghan, 2001; Milstead, 2001), in the “associative” relations widely assumed in psychology, and in the relations between members of Lakoff’s (1987) nonclassical categories.Consider, for example, this (constructed) text: “How can we figure out what a text means? One could argue that the meaning is in the mind of the reader, but some people think that the meaning lies within the text itself.” In what ways do readers see the relations in this text? One reader reports two lexical chains or word groups: ‘understanding’, which contains the words figure out, means, meaning, mind, think, meaning, and ‘text’, which contains the words text, reader, text. In the ‘understanding’ word group, related word pairs and the non-classical relations that this reader reports are these: figure out, means: means is the likely result of the action figure out: mind, figure out; mind is where the figure out action happens; think, meaning: meaning is a result of the action of thinking. The reader’s description of the word group is ‘words to do with human understanding’1.We have carried out a study of the degree of subjectivity of the word groups and lexical semantic relations perceived by readers of a text. The results will be presented below.