A text or discourse is not just a set of sentences, each on some random topic. Rather, the sentences and phrases of any sensible text will each tend to be about the same things -- that is, the text will have a quality of unity. This is the property of cohesion -the sentences "stick together" to function as a whole. Cohesion is achieved through back-reference, conjunction, and semantic word relations. Cohesion is not a guarantee of unity in text but rather a device for creating it. As aptly stated by Halliday and Hasan (1976), it is a way of getting text to "hang together as a whole." Their work on cohesion has underscored its importance as an indicator of text unity.
Lexical cohesion is the cohesion that arises from semantic relationships between words. All that is required is that there be some recognizable relation between the words.
Halliday and Hasan have provided a classification of lexical cohesion based on the type of dependency relationship that exists between words. There are five basic classes:
Examples 1, 2, and 3 fall into the class of reiteration. Note that reiteration includes not only identity of reference or repetition of the same word, but also the use of superordinates, subordinates, and synonyms.
Examples 4 and 5 fall into the class of collocation, that is, semantic relationships between words that often co-occur. They can be further divided into two categories of relationship: systematic semantic, and nonsystematic semantic.
Systematic semantic relationships can be classifiedin a fairly straightforward way. This type of relation includes antonyms, members of an ordered set such as {one, two, three}, members of an unordered set such as {white, black,red}, and part-to-whole relationships like {eyes, mouth, face}. Example 5 is an illustration of collocation where the word relationship, {garden, digging}, is nonsystematic. This type of relationship is the most problematic, especially from a knowledge representation point of view. Such collocation relationships exist between words that tend to occur in similar lexical environments. Words tend to occur in similar lexical environments because they describe things that tend to occur in similar situations or contexts in the world. Hence, context-specific examples such as {post office, service, stamps, pay, leave} are included in the class. (This example is from Ventola (1987), who analyzed the patterns of lexical cohesion specific to the context of service encounters.) Another example of this type is {car,lights, turning}, taken from example 14 in Section 4.2. These words are related in the situation of driving a car, but taken out of that situation, they are not related in a systematic way. Also contained in the class of collocation are wordassociations. Examples from Postman and Keppel (1970) are {priest, church}, {citizen, U.S.A.}, and {whistle, stop}. Again, the exact relationship between these words can be hard to classify, but there does exist a recognizable relationship.

Often, lexical cohesion occurs not simply between pairs of words but over a succession of a number of nearby related words spanning a topical unit of the text. These sequences of related words will be called lexical chains. There is a distance relation between each word in the chain, and the words co-occur within a given span. Lexical chains do not stop at sentence boundaries. They can connect a pair of adjacent words or range over an entire text.
Lexical chains tend to delineate portions of text that have a strong unity of meaning. Consider this example (sentences 31-33 from the long example given in Section 4.2):
Example 6
In front of me lay a virgin crescent cut out of pine bush. A dozen houses were going up, in various stages of construction, surrounded by hummocks of dry earth and stands of precariously tall trees nude halfway up their trunks. They were the kind of trees you might see in the mountains.
A lexical chain spanning these three sentences is {virgin, pine, bush, trees, trunks, trees}. Section 3 will explain how such chains are formed. Section 4 is an analysis of the correspondence between lexical chains and the structure of the text.
