Written text is one of the most important means of conveying information. For example, a significant proportion of information in college and high school classrooms is presented via textbooks. Unfortunately, many students are poor readers or have difficulty understanding textbooks (Bowen, 1999; Snow, 2002). Their difficulties can arise from several deficits, ranging from inefficient decoding abilities (e.g., Perfetti, 1985) to problems with higher level comprehension skills (Cornoldi, De Beni, & Pazzaglia, 1996; Hoover & Gough, 1990; Stothard & Hulme, 1996). Another important source of readers’ comprehension difficulty stems from the nature of the textbooks themselves. Many school texts are difficult to understand because important background information is omitted and relations between concepts are not explicit (Beck, McKeown, & Gromoll, 1989; Chi, De Leeuw, Chiu, & LaVancher, 1994; Wilson & Anderson, 1986).The purpose of this study was to examine how characteristics of the reader (i.e., prior knowledge and comprehension skill) and characteristics of the text (i.e., text cohesion) affect reading comprehension. More specifically, we were interested in determining whether comprehension skill mediates the interaction between prior knowledge and text cohesion (McNamara & Kintsch, 1996), which we refer to as the reverse cohesion effect. The reverse cohesion effect is the counterintuitive finding that high-knowledge readers learn better with less cohesive texts (McNamara & Kintsch, 1996). We propose that the reverse cohesion effect can be explained as a function of the reader’s comprehension skill and that only less skilled high-knowledge comprehenders benefit from low-cohesion text. In this article we outline the relevant research on how the characteristics of reader and the text influence comprehension and how both characteristics interact with each other. Then we describe our study, which provides evidence that cohesive text can benefit both low-knowledge readers and skilled high-knowledge readers.Reader characteristics such as prior knowledge and comprehension skill have been shown to have a large impact on reading comprehension. Essentially, readers who have more prior knowledge about the text (either via schematic information or prior experience) better understand and learn more from text (e.g., Arbuckle, Vanderleck, Harsany, & Lapidus, 1990; Bransford & Johnson, 1972; Shapiro, 2004; Spilich, Vesonder, Chiesi, & Voss, 1979; Willoughby, Waller, Wood, & Mackinnon, 1993). In addition, skilled comprehenders understand more information from text because they have better word representations (Perfetti, & Hart, 2002), make more inferences (Cain, Oakhill, Barnes, & Bryant, 2001; Long, Oppy, & Seely, 1994; McNamara & O’Reilly, in press; Oakhill, 1984), use more reading strategies (Bereiter & Bird, 1985; Brown, 1982; Goldman & Saul, 1990; Lau & Chan, 2003; Long et al., 1994; Magliano & Millis, 2004; Magliano, Wiemer-Hastings, Millis, Muñoz, & McNamara, 2002; Oakhill, 1984; Oakhill & Yuill, 1996), and have more intrinsic motivation (Lau & Chan, 2003) than less skilled comprehenders.In addition to characteristics of the reader, characteristics of the text also influence comprehension (Linderholm et al., 2000; McNamara & W. Kintsch, 1996;Downloaded by [UVA Universiteitsbibliotheek SZ] at 14:34 18 February 2014Voss & Silfies, 1996). The degree to which the concepts, ideas, and relations within a text are explicit has been referred to as text cohesion, whereas the effect of text cohesion on readers’ comprehension has been referred to as text coherence (Graesser, McNamara, & Louwerse, 2003; Graesser, McNamara, Louwerse, & Cai, 2004; McNamara, 2001; McNamara & Kintsch, 1996; McNamara, Kintsch, Songer, & Kintsch, 1996). In an analysis of cohesion in social studies texts, Beck et al. (1989) found that many texts have structures that are far from optimal in promoting deep comprehension or coherence. Beck’s analysis revealed that texts often present too much information with too little detail, contain loosely connected statements, and have poor integration with previous sections. Disjointed text structures impede comprehension by forcing the reader to form a disconnected and superficial mental representation of the material. Indeed, manipulations designed to improve text cohesion by increasing casual and referential cohesion have been successful in elevating student comprehension (Beck, McKeown, Sinatra, & Loxterman, 1991; Britton & Gülgöz, 1991; Lehman & Schraw, 2002; Linderholm et al., 2000; Vidal-Abarca, Martínez, & Gilabert, 2000).In sum, knowledge, comprehension skill, and text cohesion improve understanding. However, research has further shown that effects of cohesion interact with individual differences such as knowledge and comprehension ability (McNamara, 2001; McNamara & Kintsch, 1996; McNamara et al., 1996; Voss & Silfies, 1996). For instance, McNamara and colleagues found that high-cohesion texts may not be optimal for all readers. In three studies conducted by McNamara and colleagues (McNamara, 2001; McNamara & Kintsch, 1996; McNamara et al., 1996), text cohesion was manipulated by increasing argument overlap and causal cohesion of an original (low-cohesion) text. The text topics included heart disease (McNamara et al., 1996), the Vietnam War (McNamara & Kintsch, 1996; see also Britton & Gülgöz, 1991), and cell mitosis (McNamara, 2001). These studies found with middle-school students (McNamara et al., 1996) and college students (McNamara, 2001; McNamara & Kintsch, 1996) that only low-knowledge readers significantly benefited from high-cohesion texts. Low-knowledge readers benefit from high-cohesion text because they lack the knowledge to infer information that is not stated in the text. However, these studies also found a reverse cohesion effect, such that high-knowledge readers showed better comprehension when they read the low-cohesion version of a text.According to McNamara and colleagues (1996), high-knowledge readers are less likely to access and use their knowledge to make inferences when the text is highly cohesive. They generate fewer inferences because comprehension of high-cohesion text is seemingly successful; that is, the inferences are not called for by the text. In contrast, the inference processes engaged to bridge the conceptual gaps within and between sentences in low-cohesion text result in greater integration between the text and prior knowledge. Thus, low cohesion induces high-knowledge readers to integrate their knowledge with the text, and that process enhances comprehension. High cohesion, in contrast, induces high-knowledge readers into more passive, perhaps minimalist, processing of the text (e.g., McKoon & Ratcliff, 1992).Other work by Voss and Silfies (1996) indicated that the effect of text cohesion depends on comprehension skill. Voss and Silfies gave readers two fictitious history texts that varied in terms of cohesion. Cohesion for one version was increased by adding information about the causal factors between the events described in the less cohesive text. Comprehension skill was measured by the Nelson–Denny reading test, whereas prior knowledge was assessed with a general measure of history knowledge. A general measure of history knowledge was used as opposed to a domain-specific measure because the information contained in the experimental passages was fictional. The authors used correlational analyses to assess the relations among prior knowledge, reading skill, and text cohesion. The results indicated that comprehension skill was primarily correlated to improved performance on the high-cohesion text, whereas prior knowledge was correlated to better performance on the low-cohesion text. In other words, skilled comprehenders were better able to take advantage of the added information provided in the high-cohesion text. Voss and Silfies concluded that comprehension skill was primarily related to developing an effective textbase, whereas knowledge was primarily related to developing a coherent situation model.In contrast to the results reported by Voss and Silfies (1996), Linderholm et al. (2000) found that both skilled and less skilled comprehenders equally benefited from reading a high-cohesion text. In their study, causal cohesion was increased by rearranging the temporal order, making goals more explicit, and repairing coherence breaks. However, the benefit of increasing cohesion was only evident for more difficult texts. Linderholm et al. did not find any benefit of increasing cohesion when the text was easy as judged by analyses of the goal structure, causal organization, and referential overlap.