The sublime has intrigued generations of philosophers, poets, writers, and artists, inspiring numerous essays and works of art. Over the years, several different interpretations of the sublime have risen, which are for example represented by the differences in works of art. Yet, upon close inspection, it seems that these seemingly different views might have more in common than is presumed at first. A small investigation using Shelley’s “Mont Blanc” and Byron’s “Darkness” might shed light on the shadows of the sublime.
The fascinating nature of the sublime lies in the fact that it plays upon the strongest emotions humans are capable of feeling; pain, or more precisely, the idea of pain. While this might seem somewhat paradoxical, since most people prefer to avoid pain, Burke explains that “at certain distances, and with certain modifications, [pain and terror] may be, and are delightful” (459). Any kind of disaster is usually not something people desire, yet those same people delight in watching apocalyptical scenes in movies and other media. The key difference between the two scenarios is that of distance, which Burke terms aesthetic distance. The ideas of pain and terror evoke strong emotions, yet as long as people are aware that nothing can happen to them personally, these emotions are experienced as pleasurable.
The sublime was a great source of inspiration for artists in the romantic period, since it is so strongly connected to a main interest in that period: the emotional mind of the human being. As a result, countless poems, paintings, and other works of art that deal with the sublime have been created in the romantic period. Frequently, these works of art focused on the sublimity that can be observed in nature, a famous examples being Friedrich’s Wanderer Above the Sea of Fog in painting, and Shelley’s “Mont Blanc” with Byron’s “Darkness” in poetry. The latter two seem to offer different views of the sublime, yet when examined in greater detail certain parallels can be observed.
At first glance Shelley’s “Mont Blanc” appears as a kind of ode to the mountain, describing the majesty and splendour of the area. Shelley attributes the mountain timeless and endless qualities, with waterfalls that “leap forever”, “a vast river” that “ceaselessly bursts and raves” (Shelley, “Mont Blanc” 763), and “chainless winds” (Shelley, “Mont Blanc” 763). The sheer immensity of the mountain and its vistas are a source of the sublime, as they dwarf the human beholding them, making the human feel insignificantly small amongst the wonders of nature. This slightly more positive view of the sublime is further reenforced by Shelley’s choice of lexicon, which for the most part carry a positive, or at least neutral, connotation. The “still, snowy, and serene” (Shelley, “Mont Blanc” 764) Mont Blanc is in the possession of a “still and solemn power” (Shelley, “Mont Blanc” 765) and similar lines indicate a majestic beauty that is inherent to the mountain, yet the immensity of this is so great that mere humans are left awestruck “in a trance sublime” (Shelley, “Mont Blanc” 763).
The white purity of “Mont Blanc” is countered by the black vision of Byron’s “Darkness”, which does not attempt to soften the bleakness of the situation portrayed in the poem. The end of all life on earth is already a terrifying idea by itself, enough to inspire a sense of dread in the reader. Similar to Shelley in “Mont Blanc”, Byron also employs lexis to strengthen the dark atmosphere of the poem. “Famine fed upon all entrails” (Byron 615), “clouds perish’d” (Byron 616), and the “meagre by the meagre were devoured” (Byron 615) carry heavy images and unsettling thoughts. However, Byron utilises another stylistic figure to enhance the dark tones, namely alliteration. He skilfully applies this throughout the poem, for example in “forests set on fire” (Byron 615), “gorging himself in gloom” (Byron 615), and “the dropping dead” (Byron 615). It takes on near onomatopoeic qualities, the repetition of sounds almost resemble the echoes of the reader’s voice in the void that is left after the end of all life. The view of the sublime that Byron appeals to is a dark vision of terror, directly invoking the ideas of pain and death, leaving the reader in a sense of despair.
Byron is very clear in his message that nature does not care for the fate of the human race, that it is indifferent to the efforts of humanity and follows its own path. He alienates nature from humans, showing that it has a destructive side in opposition to its nurturing aspects. He also touches upon the vast difference in timescale of the earth and humans; civilisations rise and fall in mere seconds compared to the unimaginably long life of the earth, widening the gap between the human and its ‘natural’ home. It is this same idea of alienation from nature that also sounds through Shelley’s “Mont Blanc”, revealing a more terrifying vision of the sublime behind the white facade. “Is this the scene where the old Earthquake-dæmon taught her young ruin?” (Shelly, “Mont Blanc” 764) shows Shelley’s knowledge of geographical phenomena that might have formed the mountains over an by human standards immeasurable stretch of time. He describes a world that is in the possession of “some unknown omnipotence” (Shelley, “Mont Blanc” 764), an entity of sorts that is indifferent to the lives of humans. As “the race of man, flies far in dread” (Shelley, “Mont Blanc” 765), “Mont Blanc yet gleams on high” (Shelley, “Mont Blanc” 765), the mountain is unaffected by the perils that plague mere mortals.
Yet it is not all dark and hopeless for Shelley. As a romanticist, Shelley greatly values the power of the human mind and imagination. In “A Defence of Poetry”, he says that “all things exist as they are perceived: at least in relation to the percipient” (611). Through this he attributes a certain power to the human mind, upon which he elaborates further on in the text: the mind “creates anew the universe after it has been annihilated in our minds by the recurrence of impressions blunted by reiteration” (611). This implies a reversal of the relationship between humanity and reality: rather than humans being created by and living in a reality, humans create a reality within themselves based on impressions of the outside world. This power that humans hold over reality is challenged by the enormity of Mont Blanc, and it seems not unreasonable that this is the source of the sublime nature of the mountain. The terror that it inspires is not one of destruction of the physical body, but one of destruction of the power that the mind holds over the mountain. But since the “shade of [Mont Blanc], some phantom, some faint image” (Shelley, “Mont Blanc” 764) can be recreated in the “still cave of the witch Poesy” (Shelley, “Mont Blanc” 764), it is clear that the poetic power over reality of the mind holds true. Shelley foreshadows this in the opening lines of the poem: “the everlasting universe of things flows through the mind” (“Mont Blanc” 762). Even though the scale of the universe, or even the earth, might be beyond human understanding, it is not beyond the mind’s capacity to encompass. This is echoed in Byron’s “Darkness”, where the end of life on earth, something that is physically impossible for humans to experience, is nevertheless experienced through the poets mind, revealing the unlimited potential that lies within the inward soul.
A definitive answer to the question as to what the sublime exactly is or how it functions can not be derived from these two poems, they do not even attempt to provide such answers. They appear to be more akin to explorations of the sublime and its subtleties as a poetic device, while at the same time serving as forays into the unfathomable depths of the human mind and its power. Shelley and Byron elevate beyond mere poets and become creators of reality: as Pierantonio Serassi said “Non merita nome di creatore, se non Iddio ed il Poeta” (qtd. in Shelley, “A Defence of Poetry” 611).
