In recent years, there has been an increasing activity in building up corpora annotated at multiple linguistic levels (syllable, word, clause, text) and strata (phonology, grammar, semantics). With the growing interest in such multi-layer corpora comes the need for tools that support corpus annotation and exploration of the resulting annotations as well as facilitate further computational processing.
For the lower levels of the linguistic system (grammatical units, such as words, phrases, clauses), there are plenty of tools that provide the necessary functionalities. For instance, at the stratum of grammar, part-of-speech tagging and shallow phrase structure parsing can be carried out automatically at reasonable accuracy, with hardly any human intervention. Also, there are some rather mature tools for corpus inspection, such as special-purpose query (e.g., CQP (Christ, 1994a)), TIGERSearch (Lezius and Ko ̈nig, 2000; Ko ̈nig and Lezius, 2003), concordancers (e.g., XKwic (Christ, 1994b)) and browsers for tree structures (e.g., Annotate (Plaehn and Brants, 2000)).

However, when it comes to the unit of text and the analysis of meaning, the situation is difficult in two respects. First, fully automatic annotation is often not possible; second, tools supporting annotation and exploration exist only for selected aspects of textual analysis, e.g., for rhetorical structure (O’Donnell, 1997). Rhetorical structure is clearly an important aspect of a text’s organization and vital for a full-blown interpretation of a text. But there are many other meaning-creating features in a text, which are interesting from the viewpoints of both linguistic theory and computational-linguistic processing. One such feature is cohesion.

Cohesion is defined as the set of linguistic means we have available for creating texture (Halliday and Hasan, 1976, 2), i.e., the property of a text of being an interpretable whole (rather than unconnected sentences). Cohesion occurs “where the interpretation of some element in the text is dependent on that of another. The one presupposes the other, in the sense that it cannot be effectively decoded except by recourse to it.” (Halliday and Hasan, 1976, 4).
The most often cited type of cohesion is reference.1 Consider example (1) (from Halliday and Hasan, 1976, 2).
(1) Wash and core six cooking apples. Put them into a fireproof dish.
In example (1), it is the cohesive tie of coreference between them and apples that gives cohesion to the two sentences, so that we interpret them as a text. The detection of such referential ties is clearly essential for the semantic interpretation of a text. Corpora annotated for reference relations are thus of interest for both linguistics, e.g., for testing theories of information structure (loci of high/low informational load, informational statuses (Given/New)), and computational processing, e.g., for applications such as information extraction or information retrieval.
Another type of cohesion, coacting with reference to create texture, is lexical cohesion (cf. Halliday and Hasan, 1976). Lexical cohesion is the central device for making texts hang together experientially, defining the aboutness of a text (cf. Halliday and Hasan, 1976, chapter 6). Typically, lexical cohesion makes the most substantive contribution to texture: According to Hasan (1984) and Hoey (1991), around fourty to fifty percent of a text’s cohesive ties are lexical.
In its simplest incarnation, lexical cohesion operates with repetition, either simple string repetition or repetition by means of inflectional and derivational variants of the word contracting a cohesive tie. The more complex types of lexical cohesion work on the basis of the semantic relationships between words in terms of sense relations, such as synonymy, hyponymy, antonymy and meronymy (cf. Halliday and Hasan, 1976, 278–282). See examples of a meronymic relation (highlighted in italics) and an antonymic relation (highlighted in bold face) in (2) below; the latter at the same time is a case of repetition.2
